9/7/2025

Today I ventured into the OSI model (open systems interconnection model), which taught me about how all devices on a 
network send, recieve, and interpret data.

An easy way I learnt to remember this in highschool was through the acronym:
All Politicians Say Teri Nani Does Physics ("All politicians say your grandmother does physics").

LAYERS:

1. Physical (physics) - 
The first layer is called the physical later, which - as the name suggests - refers to the physical connections between 
devices on the network. For instance ethernet cables that connect devices reside on this layer of the OSI model. 
Data is transmitted through these cables in the binary format (1s and 0s).

2. Data link (does) - 
The second layer is called the data link layer, and its main role is to present the data in a format suitable for 
transmission layer on. It does this by associating the physical MAC address ingrained on the recieving device's 
NIC chip to the IP address of the sender's device.

3. Network (nani) - 
The third layer is called the network layer and this is where all the data is routed over across the internet to the 
intended device. Data which had been broken into smaller chunks is now reassembled. Routing involves 3 processes, 
finding the shortest path, most reliable path (no/ minimal data loss), and the fastest path (fibre > copper). Routers 
are known as layer 3 devices and they deal simply with the IP addresses of each device. The OSPF (open shortest path first) 
protocol and the RIP (routing information protcol) are used to determine the best path to route the data.

4. Transport (teri) - 
This layer dictates protocols that take place when data is being transmitted across the network. Two protocols, TCP and 
UDP are used based on use case. TCP is an abreviation for transmission control protocol and is used to create a 
constant connection between 2 devices, and is also known for integrating and error checking process to ensure data sent 
has been recieved and correctly reassembled at the destination. This makes it a much more slower process than UDP. UDP is 
an abreviation for user datagram protocol and is not as advanced as the TCP, as it does not have error checking. So, one 
can just hope that no data is lost through UDP. However, UDP is much faster and is reliably used for tasks such as small 
file sharing, and video streaming as data lost would be just some pixels causing lower quality. Therefore, TCP is more 
accurate, and UDP is much more faster even though it does not care whether data has been received or not.

5. Session (say) - 
The session layer is used to maintain an active session between two devices connected to the network. When a connection 
is succesfully active, so is the session. The session layers contains checkpoints so that if data is lost the process 
doesn't have to start again, it can just resume from where it left from.

6. Presentation (politicians) - 
This layer is responsible for standardizing the data into a universal format that is readable by different devices. There 
are multiple models of devices on a network and each have their own integrated/ preffered format to read/ write data in, 
but this layer just formats it so it can be displayed in the same way on the destination as it was at the source. For 
example, there are different email clients with different formats, but the contents of the email will still be the same. 
So this layer acts as a translator.

7. Application (all) - 
The last layer is what we actually see on our devices. This is implemented through a GUI (graphical user interface), which
is the front face of the data. A clean, interactive visual of data sent or recieved. Examples include browsers, email 
clients, file servers etc. 

Although the abreviation is said starting from Application layer (all), the order is from reverse and it starts from 
the Physical layer (physics). So techinchally if we track how data is sent across a network, the path would be - physics 
does nani teri say politicians all. Or conviniently "Please Do Not Take Science People Aggresively" - Physical, Data link, 
Network, Transport, Session, Presentation, Application.
