11/7/25

Today I finished learning about network fundamentals. I gained knowledge about port forwarding, firewalls, and VPNs.

Port forwarding:
Port forwarding is a process implemented by the adminstrator to allow public connections to their services such as their 
website. If port fowarding did not exist everything would only be accessible within a private network. However, since 
this exists, people can now allow others to view their services on the Internet (websites, games etc). This is set up 
through the router. An example of this is setting up a minecraft server to play with friends. You will require a static IP 
address, one that does not change (dynamic), and your friends can use it to connect to port 25565 (eg: 192.168.1.1:25565).


Firewalls:
These are basically a physical barrier between one's network and network traffice (incoming and outgoing). It has a set of 
defined rules (by the adminstrator/ user) on what traffice is allowed/ denied. This is used as a security feature to prevent 
any DDOS (distributed denial of service) attack on a network. Firewalls operate at layer 3 (Network) and layer 4 (Transport) 
of the OSI model.

1. Stateful - This type of firewall blocks network traffice based upon the entire connection of a device. For example, if 
the connection from the host is bad, it will block the entire device from sending any traffice whatsoever. Much more 
resource consumption takes place.

2. Stateless - This firewall blocks individual packets. A bad packet does not render the entire device to be blocked. Much 
faster than stateful and great at recieving large amounts of traffice. However, these firewalls are often dumb as they 
are only as effective as the rules defined within them, if the rule does not exactly match for a certain negative packet, 
the entire effectiveness of the firewall is useless.

VPNs:
These are called virtual private networks and they are a technology that creates a separate communication path for 
networks over the Internet, as part of the process which is known as tunneling. Devices that are part of this tunnel 
have their own private network so any data they send of recieve is encrypted. This is beneficial in an office scenario 
as VPNs allow for connection to a network from any geographical location. For example, to connect to the main HQ in sweden 
an employee will connect to an VPN in sweden and then access the main HQ database.

Advantages:
- No geographical limitations
- Privacy
- Anonymity

Technology:
1. PPP - is used by PPTP to allow for authentication and private data encryption. VPNs use private key and public key 
certificate (similar to SSH) and these must match for connection to be sucesfull. This technology is not capable of 
leaving a network by itself.
2. PPTP (point to point tunneling protocol) - allows data from PPP to travel and leave a network. Often weakly encrypted.
3. IPSec (initernet protocol security) - encrypts data using IP framework. Difficult to set up, but strong as compared to 
alternatives.

Extra details about switches:
Switches are of both layer 2 (data link) and layer 3 (network) type. The difference is that layer 2 switch does not have 
any IP address associated to it (only frames as discussed before). However, layer 3 switches are more sophisticated 
and have some responsibility like the router. They send frames like layer 2 swtiches, but also route packets to other 
devices using the IP. In general switches are used to connect to multiple devices using ethernet cables.

VLAN:
A virtual Local Area Network (VLAN) is a way fo separating two networks from each other. For example, in a business 
scenario, the sales department and the accounting department will each have their own private IP addresses, and their own 
network traffic, which is un-readeable and un-writeable by the other respectively. Although, both of these private networks 
will be connected to the same switch which connects to the same router. This split allows for networks to be treated 
separately, as each side will have specific communication and rules.
