7/7/2025


Today I delved into the field of cybersecurity by learning through the pre-security modules in TryHackMe.
I had already finished the intro to cybersecurity module where I learnt about different jobs and categories, like
the red team or blue team, SOC analyst, penetration tester, cybersecurity architect, incident responder and many others.

Then, I learnt about the basics of networking, which included conceptual knowledge about IP and MAC addresses.

IP address is an abreviation for the term "Internet Protocol", which is basically used as an identifier for the host
that is sending requests on the internet (a collection of networks). IP addresses are divided into 4 octets and they look
like this: 192.168.1.1 (represents home address). These IP addresses follow a set of protocols or standards that dictate
how a device communicates on a network with other devices.

The IP address also comes in two forms, a public IP address and a private IP address. The public IP address is what
is used whenever data is sent across the internet. However, when two devices want to communicate with each other, they
use their respective private IP address. The public IP address is basically what you pay the bill for to your internet
service provider (ISP). 

A crucial problem that has recently come up is that there are too many devices connected to the internet now,
and since we have been relying on IPv4 (an iteration for the IP), we cannot accomodate all users. IPv4 supports
only 2^32 IP addresses (4.29 billion) but there are now more devices than that (about 50 billion). So a new iteration
called IPv6 is gradually being implemented to replace the previous IPv4 iteration as the v6 now supports 2^128
addresses (340 trillion!), which is more than enough for the forseable future. It is also considered more efficient
due to recent methodologies. A typical IPv6 address looks like this: 2a00:22c4:a531:c500:425f:cce6:c36b:f64d.

The MAC address is an abreviation of the term "Media Access Control" which is a representation of a physical chip that
resides inside all devices called the network interface card. This card holds this unique MAC address which is a set 
of 12 character hexadecimal numbers like: a4:c3:f0:85:ac:2d.

The vulnerability with MAC addresses is that they can be spoofed, meaning an attacker can get hold of your unique 
MAc address and pretend to send requests on the network as if they were coming from you. This can be an easy bypass
for a firewall that only allows requests from certain users (whitelist). 
