8/7/2025

Today I got started on the basics of subnetting, which basically entails dividing a network into multiple smaller
parts for better efficiency and security.

LAN TOPOLOGIES:
There are different topologies or designs through which a network is implemented.

Start topology - looks like a star and is most often used in today's world as it is very efficient. Devices on the 
network are connected to a central device usually a switch (better than hub). This means that devices send packets 
(unit of data) to a main, central device which then sends the data forward to the respective recieving device. So the 
main disadvantage of this network is that if the central device (switch) breaks the entire network breaks.

Bus topology - looks like a typical bus route where devices reside on the left and right side of the main road (cable), 
which is called the backbone cable in this case. This cable is used to transmit data between devices. The advantage of 
a bus topology is that it is quite cheap to implement unlike the star topology, but it has a vulnerability when it 
comes to transmitting large amounts of data. Large amounts of data can break the network causing data loss.

Ring toplogy - looks like a ring (circular network), which is also quite easy and cheap to implement like the bus 
topology, but it has the disadvantage that is one device breaks or a connection between two devices breaks, the entire 
network breaks apart as data packets are transmitted in one directions around the entire ring. 

Switch - is a dedicated device on a network that is used to aggregate multiple other devices like computers, mobiles, 
printers, etc. These are usually found in larger networks such as for schools and offices and boast excellent efficiency
when is comes to transmitting data and reducing network traffice. Switches are better than repeaters and hubs because 
they do not repeat the packet being sent to every single port on the network, the switch simply sends it to the intended 
device. Switches are connected to routers - multiple can be conencted at once so that if one path breaks down, other can 
be used.

Router - device that connectes networks with each other. It does this by routing (hence the name) data over. Routing 
is process of data travellign across networks, and is useful when there are multiple devices in the path.

Summary:
cost effective - bus topology, ring topology
expensive - star topology

SUBNETTING BASICS:
Subnetting is a process performed by network adminstrators to divide a network into smaller networks. This is done 
in the case of different departments under a business such as a network for accounting, for finance, and for human 
resources etc. Just how an IP address is divided into 4 octets, the subnet mask (a number associated to the number of 
hosts that can fit in a network) is also divided into a number of four bytes (32 bits), which ranges from 0-255.

Subnets use IP addresses to identify: network address (start of the network), host address (device on the subnet), and 
default gateway (a device that is capable of sending information to another network).

ARP:
Address resolution protocol is a technology that is responsible for associating the MAC address (physical identifier) 
to an IP address on a network. Whenever data needs to be transmitted on a network, the IP address is used to broadcast 
a message like "Who has the MAc address that owns ... IP address" on the network. This is called the ARP request. 
The ARp reply is the MAC address that is given by the device that owns the requested IP address. 

DHCP:
Dynamic host configuration protocol is a server that is used to automatically assign an IP address to a devicec on the 
network. This assignment can be done manually also but it is usually done through this DHCP server. Process is as follows:

1. DHCP discover - new device on network asks if a DHCP server exists on the network that can provide it with an IP.
2. DHCP offer - the DHCP (if it exists) offers an IP address.
3. DHCP request - the new device now confirms it wants to use the given IP address.
4. DHCP AKG - the last aknowledgement message from the DHCP server saying the process has been completed.

